we tend to think of Mars as a dead
planet where all the exciting geologic
activity happened billions of years ago
but information from NASA's Mars
Reconnaissance Orbiter shows us that
Mars is still a very dynamic place Mars
has a permanent ice cap made up of water
ice at its North Pole
this pole is ringed by sand dunes which
we're looking straight down on these
dunes are made of small bits of basalt
dark volcanic rock similar to the rocks
found around the Hawaiian volcanoes in
the fall in winter the temperatures are
so cold that 30% of the Martian carbon
dioxide atmosphere freezes onto the
ground forming a seasonal polar cap the
ground gets covered with a bright layer
of seasonal carbon dioxide ice or dry
ice that's about one to two feet thick
when we flip between images taken at
different times in the spring we can see
the dry ice cracks form under the sun's
heat as the solid carbon dioxide turns
into gas the gas beneath the ice escapes
carrying dark sand and dust that move as
we can see down the steep sides of the
dune we are now looking at different
parts of the vast field of dunes these
are called bark and dunes at the start
of this time-lapse the dunes are covered
with seasonal dry ice so everything is
roughly the same color the dark streaks
and splotches are sand from the dune
there are small splotches of sand at the
crest of the dune then we start seeing
the ice crack sand is pushed onto the
top of the ice layer by the escaping gas
outlining the cracks as time goes on the
cracks widen and fresh bright frost
condenses in the vicinity now we see
sand coming from the crest of the dune
and sliding down the steep dune slopes a
ferocious wind has picked up blowing
sand and dust across the dune until the
dark sand dune is free of seasonal ice
let's watch that whole sequence again we
start with ice-covered dunes in the
early spring some areas of the ice
rupture and crack allowing sand and dust
to escape along with the escaping gas
the gas from the dry-ice destabilizes
the slopes reshaping the dunes this
activity happens every spring in the
vast dune fields of the Martian polar
regions these are not the sort of events
that will naturally occur on earth Mars
may look earth-like but in some ways it
is a very different planet from our own